---
stage: Enablement
group: Distribution
info: To determine the technical writer assigned to the Stage/Group associated with this page, see https://about.gitlab.com/handbook/engineering/ux/technical-writing/#designated-technical-writers
---

# GitLab Cloud Native Chart 5.0

Along with the `14.0` release of GitLab, we have bumped the chart version to `5.0`.

## Summary of major changes

- The bundled PostgreSQL database is [upgraded to 12.7](#postgresql)
- Dropped support for [Unicorn](#unicorn-webserver) as webserver
- No longer supporting installs using [Helm 2.x](#helm-2)
- The bundled Cert-Manager chart has been [upgraded to 1.2.0](#cert-manager)

## Upgrade path from 4.x

In order to upgrade to the `5.0` version of the chart, you first need to upgrade to the latest `4.12.x`
release of the chart. Check the [version mapping details](../installation/version_mappings.md) for the latest patch.

If you don't first upgrade to the latest `4.12.x` patch, you will see the following error from `helm upgrade`

```shell
Error: UPGRADE FAILED: Job failed: BackoffLimitExceeded
```

You can then confirm you are in this situation by looking for pods in error with the text `gitlab-upgrade-check` in the name.

If you check the logs for those pods will see the version upgrade error message:

```plaintext
It seems you are upgrading the GitLab Helm Chart from X (GitLab X) to 5.0.0 (GitLab 14.0.0).
It is required to upgrade to the latest 4.12.x version first before proceeding.
Please follow the upgrade documentation at https://docs.gitlab.com/charts/releases/5_0.html
and upgrade to GitLab Helm Chart version 4.12.x before upgrading to 5.0.0.
```

## Upgrade from 4.12.x

Please follow the [upgrade steps for 5.0 release](../installation/upgrade.md).

## Major Changes

### PostgreSQL

As part of the `5.0.0` release of this chart, we upgraded the PostgreSQL version from `11.9` to `12.7`. This is not a
drop in replacement. Manual steps need to be performed to upgrade the database.

The [5.0 upgrade steps](../installation/upgrade.md#upgrade-steps-for-50-release)
includes the manual steps required during upgrade.

NOTE:
Note that PostgreSQL 12 is the minimum required PostgreSQL version in GitLab 14.0 (June 2021).
PostgreSQL 11 is no longer supported by GitLab 14.0 and later.

### Unicorn webserver

In version `4.0.0` of the chart the use of Unicorn as webserver was deprecated and no longer used by default, instead
Puma has been used as the default webserver. In `5.0.0` Unicorn support has been removed.

You will need to remove any Unicorn configuration from your values before upgrading to the newest version.

For Puma configuration options see the [Webservice details](../charts/gitlab/webservice/index.md).

### Helm 2

Helm 2 has been deprecated and is no longer supported upstream with its last release being in November 2020. The `4.12`
release of the GitLab Helm Chart is the last to support Tiller Helm 2.x.

See the [Helm 2-to-3 migration documentation](../installation/migration/helm.md)

### Cert-Manager

As part of the `5.0.0` release of this chart, we upgraded the Cert-Manager chart from `0.10.1` to `1.2.0`. The new
version uses the `cert-manager.io/v1` API version for the `Issuer` so if you were using a seperate Cert-Manager
instance but still using the Issuer provided by this chart, you will need to upgrade your Cert-Manager to a version
that supports the `cert-manager.io/v1` version.

If you are using the Cert-Manager and `Issuer` provided by this chart, the upgrade should happen automatically. During
the upgrade the Cert-Manager `Deployment` objects (previously named with `certmanager` in their name), will be deleted,
and new ones will be created with `cert-manager` in the name.

Check the [Cert-Manager upgrade troubleshooting section](../troubleshooting/index.md#cannot-patch-release-name-cert-manager-with-kind-deployment)
if you run into issues with Cert-Manger during upgrade.

## Upgrade path from versions prior to 4.x

You first need to upgrade to the `4.12.x` release of the charts, before upgrading to `4.0`. Please follow the
[4.0 upgrade documentation](4_0.md).

## Known issues and limitations

Below is a list of the known issues and limitations, although it may not be exhaustive.

Features that are currently out of scope:

- Relative URL as the GitLab Endpoint: <https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/charts/gitlab/-/issues/406>

## Release cadence

We will be releasing a new version of the chart with each new GitLab patch.

More information on how we are versioning the chart can be found in the [release documentation](../development/release.md).

Along with the issues and merge requests in this repository, a [changelog](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/charts/gitlab/-/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md) is available to more easily follow along with updates.

## Kubernetes deployment support

GitLab is tested against:

- [Google Kubernetes Engine](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/)
- [Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/)

Other Kubernetes deployments should also work. In the event of a specific non-GKE deployment issue, please raise an issue.

This release has automated CI testing for Kubernetes version `v1.17.17-gke.4900` and `v1.15.12-eks-31566f`.

## Technical support

Before opening an issue please review the [known issues and limitations](#known-issues-and-limitations), and [search](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/charts/gitlab/-/issues) to see if a similar issue already exists.

We greatly appreciate the wider testing of the community, and encourage [detailed issues to be reported](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/charts/gitlab/-/issues/new) so we can address them.

We welcome any improvements contributed in the form of [Merge Requests](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/charts/gitlab/-/merge_requests).
Get started with our [contributor documentation](../index.md#contributing).
